---
layout: post
title: A Review of Under Our Skin, A Cult Classic
subtitle: Chronic Lyme disease is fake, don't @ me. 
comments: true
tags: [Lyme, cults, antibiotics] 
---

*Under Our Skin* is a documentary about Lyme disease, a tick-borne disease mostly relegated to the northeastern US. It released in 2008 and received mostly positive reviews from critics. Having watched the film, I don&#39;t really understand why. _Under Our Skin_ exists to sell viewers on unnecessary and dangerous long-term antibiotic therapies for Lyme disease, as well as the existence of chronic Lyme disease.


# Lyme Disease is Boring

_Under Our Skin_ is dedicated to making Lyme seem like the most terrifying illness anyone could ever get, and that ticks are going to take over the universe or something. The filmmakers grossly exaggerate the prevalence, and severity of Lyme disease in addition to the intensity of treatment Lyme disease requires.

**You Gotta Get Those Numbers Up! Those Are Kiddie Numbers.**

The filmmakers start by overexaggerating the prevalence of Lyme. Approximately 30,000 cases of Lyme disease are reported to the CDC by state health departments, but it&#39;s estimated that a significant number go unreported. The CDC states that the actual number of Lyme disease cases may be 3 to 12 times higher. Of course, the filmmakers take this to mean the actual number of cases is 12 times higher.

But how did the CDC actually get to those numbers? The CDC cites two studies they conducted. One analyzing data from a survey of clinical laboratories, and the other from medical claims information from large insurance database. As a result, the CDC estimates the actual number of Lyme cases to be around 300,000 per year. However, by their own admission, both of these studies have significant limitations. In the study that [analyzed data from surveys sent to testing laboratories](https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/59/5/676/2895755?ijkey=JvyWcwRMpPmKo&amp;keytype=ref&amp;siteid=cid), the study states:

Two study limitations may have led to overestimating the number of infected source patients.We assumed that 1 specimen was submitted for every patient; however, it is likely that multiple specimens may have been submitted for at least some patients. For example, if 85% of patients had a single specimen, 10% had 2 specimens, and 5% had 3 specimens tested, then the overall estimate would be reduced by 17%. Also, the estimate is potentially influenced by individuals who were seropositive as a result of previous infection but did not have active infection at the time of testing. At least 1 study indicates that some successfully treated individuals can maintain a seropositive status for up to 10 years.

Furthermore, the study didn&#39;t include people who were treated and never tested for Lyme disease. The study also states people who self-referred for testing in areas where lyme is not endemic, had a much higher chance for a false positive result. The study using data from a large insurance database, states that:

Presence of a diagnostic code in the chart or a clinician diagnosis of an infectious condition does not necessarily signify a true infection (19). Possible reasons include rule-out diagnoses, codes for medical history but not incident infections, and overdiagnosis (incorrect diagnosis of LD when the patient has a different condition). Rule-out diagnoses and medical history codes most likely were reduced—but not completely eliminated—by including only outpatients treated with an antimicrobial drug recommended for LD.

While it is entirely possible that these figures are reasonably accurate, it&#39;s also entirely possible they are overinflated to a significant degree. The problem with using these kinds of studies is that they can inflate or deflate the number of cases depending on how the exclusion criteria is constructed. While there may be significantly more cases of Lyme disease than are reported to the CDC, asserting that the actual number of cases is 12 times higher based on database studies isn&#39;t exactly accurate. Regardless, even if the actual number of Lyme cases in the US is around 300,000 per year; Lyme disease still isn't that common. The database study estimated that the occurrence of physician diagnosed Lyme disease was 106 cases per 100,000 people. While that number is significant, it's still not that high even using very generous math. I&#39;ll play the Lyme lottery over the leukemia lottery any day of the week.

**Lyme Disease Is Not That Scary**

Speaking of which, the filmmakers try to make Lyme disease seem like it&#39;s as debilitating and dangerous as leukemia. While the symptoms of Lyme disease can be pretty nasty, Lyme disease is still pretty tame compared the vast majority of horrific ailments you can possibly suffer from. Early symptoms of infection include: fever, chills, headache, fatigue, muscle and joint aches, and swollen lymph nodes. If left untreated, symptoms can get markedly worse but still very treatable. Lyme disease can be treated rather easily with oral antibiotics. In the majority of cases, symptoms will resolve quickly and the infection will be completely eradicated using a course of oral antibiotics.

A very small number of patients may still experience minor symptoms following antibiotic treatment up to 6 months, however I am unable to a study in any credible journal that those symptoms will persist beyond that. A [study in](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12897313)[*Pediatrics*](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12897313) studied long-term neuropsychological outcomes of children who had facial palsy as a result of Lyme disease, and found that &quot;The neuropsychologic and health outcomes of children with facial nerve palsy attributable to Lyme disease 7 to 161 months earlier are comparable to those who did not have Lyme disease.&quot;. Another [study published in](https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/192358)[_JAMA_](https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/192358) also found that the frequency of symptoms following Lyme disease treatment occurred no more often than in the group that never had Lyme disease in the first place.

**Lyme Disease Doesn&#39;t Do That**

_Under Our Skin_ makes numerous outlandish statements about the possible effects of Lyme disease, none of which are true. The first crazy Lyme theory presented in the film is the idea that the disease can cause miscarriages, the death of a baby at birth or shortly after birth. According to one &quot;Lyme Literate MD&quot;:

At this point I&#39;ve had many women who&#39;ve gotten pregnant, who&#39;ve lost the baby or they give birth to a baby who has Lyme. The babies don&#39;t have-- the developmental growth may be off. Their IQ may be lower. They may develop seizures. They may have other neurological problems because it was not known that the mother has Lyme.

There is no evidence to suggest this is the case, and it&#39;s been studied to a rather large extent. [One study tested 2,000 mothers](https://www.ajog.org/article/0002-9378(93)90088-Z/abstract) for Lyme disease at their first prenatal visit and at delivery, and found that there was no risk of fetal death, prematurity, or congenital malformations associated with having Lyme disease at the time of conception or during pregnancy. There is no evidence that Lyme disease during pregnancy results in a child having a lower IQ, or has led to the development of neurological problems in children. Furthermore, there is no evidence that a mother with Lyme disease can pass it on to her child.

**Chronic Lyme Disease is Fake**

_Under Our Skin_ heavily promotes the idea that Lyme disease can turn into a chronic, persistent infection that requires the long-term use of antibiotics. The Infectious Disease Society of America (ISDA) held a special review panel about their Lyme treatment guidelines in 2006 an unanimously concluded that there is no existing evidence of a chronic Lyme infection and treatments of it can be dangerous. A good portion of the film is spent trying to disprove the findings of scientists using anecdotes and conspiracy theories. The chronic Lyme advocates even managed to convince a Connecticut attorney general to investigate the ISDA on the possibility of conflicts of interests on the part of the those who wrote the ISDA guidelines. In 2010, another board review was conducted of the 2006 guidelines, and they were upheld unanimously.

There are a large number of &quot;medical&quot; organizations that solely exist to try to legitimize chronic Lyme disease as a diagnosis with weak scientific evidence. These organizations also work tirelessly to lobby for legislation that protects doctors who use long-term antibiotic therapies from being sanctioned by medical boards, in addition to forcing insurance companies to pay for long-term antibiotic treatments. In Pennsylvania, [ILADS (a Lyme Loony organization) is currently trying to pass legislation](https://www.legis.state.pa.us/cfdocs/legis/PN/Public/btCheck.cfm?txtType=PDF&amp;sessYr=2017&amp;sessInd=0&amp;billBody=H&amp;billTyp=B&amp;billNbr=2301&amp;pn=3448) that would force physicians to complete two hours of Lyme disease CME and require that they include ILADS&#39;s input in creating Lyme disease CME requirements. There is [an overwhelming scientific consensus](https://lymescience.org/scientific-consensus/) that long-term antibiotic therapies provide no benefit for Lyme disease.

**Lyme Disease Probably Won&#39;t Kill You, Quack Treatments Just Might**

&quot;Under Our Skin&quot; tries to claim that Lyme disease can be deadly, when that isn&#39;t true at all really. Lyme disease is one of the least deadly illnesses in existence, since 1985 only 9 deaths have been recorded out of over a million cases. Assuming that there were 30,000 cases every year from 1985 to 2019, your chances of dying if you get Lyme disease are .00091%. Despite no real evidence of long-term negative effects or high chances of death, the documentary advocates risky antibiotic treatments from &quot;Lyme Literate&quot; Physicians. A number of the LLMDs (Lyme Loony MDs) in the film have been sanctioned by state medical boards for prescribing unnecessary long-term antibiotic therapies for the treatment of Lyme disease.

Early on in the film it shows a woman who believes she has chronic Lyme disease meeting with Lyme loony. He said that she would need 6 to 8 months of antibiotic therapy and he will need to put a catheter in. He was of course referring to a peripherally inserted central catheter. Apparently in the chronic Lyme community the use of PICC lines to administer antibiotics over a [long period time is quite common.](https://www.lymedisease.org/touched-by-lyme-adventures-of-getting-a-picc-line/)There are even stories [online of children having PICC lines inserted](http://www.panslife.com/pans-life-journey/2016/5/7/in-a-pickle-over-a-picc-line.html) and administering IV antibiotics themselves. There is no reason for have a PICC line inserted for the treatment of Lyme disease as IV antibiotics are rarely recommended and a simple IV will do as the course of treatment is very short. There are many risks associated with long term antibiotic use in general, especially when you&#39;re giving those antibiotics through a PICC line.

You do not have to look far to find stories of people dying because of various complications of PICC lines or long-term antibiotic use. The [CDC published a report](https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/66/wr/mm6623a3.htm) of three patients dying from infections from the PICC line, and infections as the result of unnecessary antibiotic treatment. To reiterate, the evidence shows that there is no benefit from the use of antibiotics for longer than the recommended guidelines. The CDC&#39;s states in their report:

These cases highlight the severity and scope of adverse effects that can be caused by the use of unproven treatments for chronic Lyme disease. In addition to the dangers associated with inappropriate antibiotic use, such as selection of antibiotic-resistant bacteria, these treatments can lead to injuries related to unnecessary procedures, bacteremia and resulting metastatic infection, venous thromboses, and missed opportunities to diagnose and treat the actual underlying cause of the patient&#39;s symptoms (8,10).†,§ Patients and their health care providers need to be aware of the risks associated with treatments for chronic Lyme disease.

## **The Many Amazing Moments of Under Our Skin**

_Under Our Skin_ features so many amazing and hilarious moments and if I&#39;m going to advise you never watching the film, it would be irresponsible for me not share them with you.

**World&#39;s Strangest Conspiracy Theory?**

_Under Our Skin_ presents the most ridiculous conspiracy theory I have ever heard. The major conspiracy theory is that the CDC, and physicians in academia are conspiring to suppress the severity of Lyme disease and keep patients from expensive treatments. According to the &quot;science writer&quot; on-screen (Anyone can call themselves that), it was a perfect storm of a couple different events starting with:

1980, the United States said it was okay for government institutions and universities to patent and profit from live organisms. So the Lyme disease organism was discovered in 1981, and all of a sudden there was the equivalent of an Oklahoma land grab, people looking under their microscopes, patenting pieces of the organism, so the people that are credited for being the Lyme disease experts no longer shared information about a new, really dangerous pathogen.&quot;

The ruling she is presumably referring to is [Diamond v. Chakrabaty](https://www.uakron.edu/dotAsset/906bc99e-17df-4e8e-8ce5-907e1155298a.pdf) in 1980, which did not rule that universities and government institutions could patent and profit from _live organisms_. The ruling allowed _genetically modified organisms_ to be patented, but does not extend to &quot;[newly discovered products of nature](https://www.uspto.gov/web/offices/pac/mpep/s2106.html)&quot;. This well established in many cases long before this ruling such as in the Supreme Court case [_Funk Brothers Seed Co. V. Kalo Inoculant Co._](https://www.bitlaw.com/source/cases/patent/Funk.html) where the court stated:

Their qualities are the work of nature. Those qualities are of course not patentable. For patents cannot issue for the discovery of the phenomena of nature. See Le Roy v. Tatham, 14 How. 156, 175. The qualities of these bacteria, like the heat of the sun, electricity, or the qualities of metals, are part of the storehouse of knowledge of all men. They are manifestations of laws of nature, free to all men and reserved exclusively to none.

Basically, what she is claiming is utter nonsense and reflects flagrant dishonesty or ignorance of even basic legal concepts. It gets better:

The other thing was the rise of managed care. Insurance companies and HMOs realized that if they can get researchers in universities to define diseases and write guidelines for diseases a certain way, then they could help manage the escalating medical costs.

Her argument almost seems reasonable if you don&#39;t think about it in the slightest. There are researchers, universities, and government health organizations researching diseases around the world, the US insurance companies payed all of them off? It would take a massive amount of money to pay off people who have it pretty good already, and researchers would incur a huge amount of risk in participating in a scheme like this. If someone working for the NIH or CDC did what she&#39;s suggesting, they would almost certainly be charged with fraud or perjury, and their careers would certainly be over if caught. Lyme disease occurs in other nations too, what do they recommend? [The European Center for Disease control also says that Lyme disease should be treated with appropriate antibiotics](https://ecdc.europa.eu/en/borreliosis/facts/factsheet) for a few weeks. Are they on a US insurance companies&#39; payroll too?

Now for my favorite part of this conspiracy:

&quot;really what this means is, the people who protected public health, so, like, the CDC, and the NIH and universities. Who didn&#39;t have any commercial interests, all of a sudden, they were partners with big pharma.&quot;

Here&#39;s the problem, the NIH and CDC do not have financial interests. They work for the United States government, _they&#39;re bankrolled by an organization that literally prints money_. This is by far the weirdest conspiracy theory I have ever heard.

** **

**Lyme Disease Basement Research/Lyme Disease Causes Everything Guy**

About 15 minutes into the film we are introduced to Dr. Alan MacDonald, who researchers Lyme disease on his own time, in his basement with his little Maltese dog named Travis. According to him the view that the bacteria that causes Lyme disease doesn&#39;t stay around in the body very long will be disproven. To date, there is no evidence that symptoms following antibiotic treatment for Lyme disease is the result of a persistent bacterial infection. He also believes that there is Lyme disease bacteria is responsible for Alzheimer&#39;s, Lou Gehrig&#39;s disease, Parkinson&#39;s disease, multiple sclerosis because he was able to find the DNA of the spirochete that causes Lyme disease in 7 out of 10 brain DNA samples. His reasoning is that if a spirochete like syphilis can cause dementia, then the Borrelia spirochete could also do that. The problem with his theory is that Lyme disease is rare when considering it on a global scale, many parts of the world will never see a case of Lyme disease. While the diseases he believes Lyme disease causes are common throughout the world.

** **

**Anecdotes vs. Evidence**

_Under Our Skin_, like all quackumentaries is filled with testimonials.  The problem with testimonials is that most people are poor historians and couldn&#39;t present their own medical history accurately if they tried. They could also be actors or just mistaken, lying about or exaggerating their symptoms. _Under Our Skin_ presents absurd testimonials at the most ridiculous times possible. The testimonials almost always come after an expert gives their opinion based on the best peer-reviewed research possible. However, there were two that were particularly jarring. The first is after an interview with a physician talking about the research showing there is no benefit to long-term antibiotic treatment. They follow it up with an anecdote from Lyme Loony MD&#39;s secretary who claimed that patients who received long-term antibiotics seemed to be doing better afterwards. Another absurd example is when they try to prove that Lyme disease is everywhere by filming one woman driving in her car who points at houses claiming that the person that lived there had Lyme disease. I have no idea how anyone is supposed to take the testimonials in the film seriously.

#
# Conclusion: A Cult Classic

&quot;Under Our Skin&quot; is a documentary designed to sell viewers on a fake illness that supposedly comes from a real illness. Throughout researching this article, I have tried to identify something about Lyme disease that makes it something you should actually worry about over any other illness. Lyme disease is uncommon even where it&#39;s the most prevalent, and the only hard part about treating it is finding a pen to write &#39;Doxycycline&#39; on a prescription pad. Lyme disease is the most overhyped illness of all time. The horror stories you hear about it are a million times worse than it actually is. It&#39;s a bacterial infection that causes temporary neurological symptoms and can be treated with oral antibiotics; that&#39;s it.

The story of how Lyme developed a reputation of being this incredibly dangerous disease that you should be terrified of is far more interesting than the disease itself. There is no such thing as &#39;chronic Lyme&#39; but there is an online cult obsessed with it. I&#39;m being quite serious when I use the term &#39;cult&#39;, I think it&#39;s accurate to call online chronic Lyme support groups cults. Although chronic Lyme cults differ from how we would usually define a cult in a few key ways.

Chronic Lyme cults (CLCs) differ from usual cults in that they don&#39;t form around a charismatic leader, however believers flock around doctors they consider to be heroes.  The last thirty minutes of the film are dedicated to portraying &quot;LLMDs&quot; as heroes standing up against the medical establishment to protect their patients. The reality is that these physicians, practice substandard medicine to treat Lyme disease, or treat a condition that does not exist. The reason why the practitioners in the film were reported by other physicians for following unusual practices in treating Lyme disease, is because they were following unusual practices in treating Lyme disease. The evidence shows that there is no benefit to long courses of IV antibiotics to treat Lyme disease. Furthermore, practitioners being sanctioned for substandard practices in the treatment of Lyme disease is not going to make physicians practicing competent medicine afraid to treat patients with Lyme disease like the film argues.

[An article in the Psychiatric times](http://www.psychiatrictimes.com/cultural-psychiatry/clinical-update-cults) on the nature of cults provides a list of traits of people who are most prone to join cults, some of which are particularly applicable. One of these traits is a low tolerance of ambiguity, and the film&#39;s many testimonials showcase this. One woman&#39;s son was born with an unspecified neurodegenerative condition, she claims that she had Lyme disease when she was pregnant and that her son was born with Lyme disease and that was the cause of his condition. While it&#39;s a sad state of affairs, there is no evidence that being treated for or having Lyme disease during pregnancy will result in any neurodegenerative conditions in children. Many CLC websites promote the idea that [Lyme disease causes or mimics the symptoms of autism](http://lymediseasechallenge.org/lyme-autism/). There is no evidence that Lyme disease causes or mimics the symptoms of autism, and [research has shown there is no correlation](https://www.aldf.com/does-lyme-disease-induce-autism-in-children/). These people want a reason for why something terrible has happened to them that science might not have a great answer for, and &#39;chronic Lyme&#39; gives them a simple, easy to digest answer.

The most notable characteristic of cults also exhibited by the chronic Lyme cults is how they treat critics and non-believers. The chronic Lyme disease cult is very passionate and has a long history of protesting the investigation of doctors not treating Lyme within established guidelines, and harassing doctors who do not want to incorporate pseudoscientific guidelines. Whenever a &quot;Lyme Literate&quot; physician is investigated by the medical boards or taken to trial for questionable practices, a chronic Lyme cult protest can always be found. Researchers and physicians who speak out against chronic Lyme lunacy are often the target of harassment campaigns in the form of baseless complaints to the board of medicine, death threats, protesting their place of work, and slanderous online blogs. One physician received [11 complaints to the board of medicine](https://web.archive.org/web/20090804025037/http:/www.nytimes.com:80/2001/06/17/magazine/17LYMEDISEASE.html?pagewanted=3) shortly after speaking out against the use of long-term antibiotics to treat the illness, and simply stating that there is no evidence that chronic Lyme disease exists. All of the complaints were dismissed, his record is still spotless, but it made him deeply afraid to even talk to the media. One of his colleagues wrote to the medical board stating:

A complaint campaign to the board is just the latest escalation in a guerrilla war against physicians, scientists and federal officials who are not inclined to view Lyme borreliosis as the Fifth Horseman.&quot; Since the campaign, Steere&#39;s friends say that he has grown more and more depressed, though he wouldn&#39;t say so publicly. &quot;This is criminal what is being done.&quot;.

However, the chronic Lyme cult would not stop in their attempt to harass him, the director of the Lyme Disease Coalition said: &quot;There will be a day of reckoning.&quot;.

It&#39;s easy to see hardcore believers of chronic Lyme as crazy given their actions, but it&#39;s important to remember that they&#39;re also victims of the most successful health misinformation campaign in history. There is more inaccurate information about Lyme disease on the internet than accurate information. When searching &quot;Lyme Disease&quot; online, the first result that isn&#39;t from the CDC, Mayo, or WebMD is a link to LymeDisease.org. Surely you would think that LymeDisease.org, is a credible source of Lyme information… right? Not quite. There are Lyme Disease support groups, Lyme disease organizations, and articles in the New York Times talking about the &quot;Lyme Controversy&quot;, all of which promote the idea that Lyme disease is a life-altering, possibly chronic condition. There are Lyme disease support groups in Australia, [when there is no evidence that Lyme disease even occurs in Australia](http://www.health.gov.au/internet/main/publishing.nsf/Content/ohp-lyme-disease.htm).

People who claim to suffer from chronic Lyme disease may not be suffering anything related to Lyme disease but they can still have real illnesses. They can be suffering from untreated illness, [one man treated for &#39;chronic Lyme&#39; actually had a brain tumor](https://lymescience.org/robert-brain-tumor-not-chronic-lyme/) that would&#39;ve been treatable without surgery if he was treated sooner. It&#39;s likely that people claiming to suffer from chronic Lyme have somatic symptom disorder. According to the APA: &quot;[Somatic symptom disorder involves a person having a significant focus on physical symptoms, such as pain, weakness or shortness of breath, that results in major distress and/or problems functioning. The individual has excessive thoughts, feelings and behaviors relating to the physical symptoms. The physical symptoms may or may not be associated with a diagnosed medical condition.](https://www.psychiatry.org/patients-families/somatic-symptom-disorder)&quot;. The more I check the research against the claims of the documentary, the weirder this documentary appears to me. _Under Our Skin_ is a very strange film for an audience who in all likelihood, already has their minds made up. This documentary is as educational as the informational videos on the Scientology YouTube channel and I would advise steering clear.
